
# Introduction

Animals feel the heat, and when faced with heat stress may alter their physiology, or behaviour, or both, to preserve biological functions [**cite**]. Most organism-level physiological responses to high temperatures, such as sweating, rely on water evaporation to transfer heat away from the core-body. Many animals are either incapable of or inefficient in engaging such responses, and must rely on behaviour to complement physiological thermoregulation. Behavioural responses to overheating involve creating or occupying heat-sinks to which excess heat may be transferred. Occupancy of and behaviours at landscape heat-sinks, such as water sources or covered landscapes, constitutes an important class of behavioural responses to heat stress. For example, temperate ungulates like moose _Alces alces_ seek refuge in shady forests [@VANBEEST2012723], while large tropical herbivores like Cape buffalo _Syncerus caffer_ immerse themselves and wallow at water sources to rapidly cool down [@bennitt2014buffalo].

Drylands living ungulates prone to heat stress must balance their dependence on water as a thermoregulatory aid with avoiding competition for resources and predation at water sources [@ECY:ECY20038482092; @owensmith2014coping; @JZO:JZO848]. This may result in only periodic visits to known sources of water and forage [@giotto2015], and when the two are spatially separated, yet frequently visited, animals pay an increased cost of movement [@JZO:JZO848]. Movement variables such as speed and directionality are broadly influenced by environmental conditions such as temperature [@schmidt2016ungulate], but a finer understanding of heat stress as a driver of animal movements requires high resolution data on positions and instantaneous ambient temperatures. While miniature temperature sensors externally fitted to GPS transmitters have proven successful in logging animal ambient temperatures [@JEZ:JEZ389; @hetem2012411], studies have shied away from using data from temperature sensors built into standard GPS transmitters.

Savanna elephants _Loxodonta africana_ in southern Africa are an excellent study system to investigate the effect of temperature on the movements of drylands-living megafauna in relation to water. Elephants are unable to sweat, and are susceptible to heat stress. In addition to deploying behavioural mechanisms such as ear-flapping, they select for thermally stable landscapes [@JANE:JANE595; @KINAHAN200747]. Further, elephants periodically return to water sources to drink [@valls2015drink], a phenomenon that has spawned the management practice of attempting to restrict elephant space use by limiting the distribution of water sources [@redfern2002manipulating]. Elephants are reported to move faster and consequently travel farther in hot-dry seasons in Namibia and Zimbabwe [@AJE:AJE1101; @valls2015drink], suggesting a direct effect of temperature on movement speed. Kruger experiences an atypical combination of hot-wet and cool-dry seasons, allowing the effect of decreased water provisioning to be decoupled from that of increased temperature. Here, we first test whether in-built temperature sensors (hereafter thermochrons) accurately report the thermal landscape of elephants, and then proceed to characterise elephant movement in relation to water sources and ambient temperature.
