
# Discussion

Our results show that thermochron temperature data are highly correlated with weather station data, and can be safely used as animal ambient temperature. Elephants make frequent visits to water sources, with most tracks between water points looping back to where they began. Elephants reach their maximum displacement from water along loops when temperatures are lowest, and begin to head back to water as temperatures rise. Elephants shuttle to and from water, with the highest speeds observed in the initial and final stages of track, i.e., near water. Temperature likely mediates elephant movement in the landscape, with elephants moving faster at higher temperatures.

## Accuracy of thermochrons

Collar-borne thermochrons are a standard feature of a number of modern GPS transmitters. Despite reporting temperatures that are a combination of ambient values, animal skin surface temperature, and heat from the operation of on-board electronics, thermochrons report the thermal landscape in which they are deployed with accuracy comparable to that of black-globes, currently the most accurate external loggers available [@JEZ:JEZ389]. They possess the advantage of not requiring additional integration or calibration. Our results relating movement to thermochron data also support the position that external loggers are sufficient to study the physiological basis of movement.

## Elephant movements to water

Kruger elephants are faithful to habitual water points to which they periodically return, similar to findings from a more arid system in Zimbabwe [@valls2015drink]. However, multi-modality in the visit interval distribution, with peaks at 12-hour multiples, is contrary to previous findings of a Poisson distribution of visit intervals [@PURDON201745]. Long trips between water are less common in the hot-wet season, when ephemeral water sources are likely more abundant, indicating that elephants probably prefer to use known water sources rather than incur greater travel costs exploring the landscape for new water points. The two halves of elephant shuttling to and from water may be driven by distinct yet related phenomena. As temperatures rise, elephants likely rush towards water to cool down, where they are joined by other megafauna [@bennitt2014buffalo; @hirst1975ungulate]. The resulting pressure on resources, increased competition, and higher predation risk for young calves may drive elephant herds to move quickly back to more suitable sites farther from water [@valls2015drink]. Elephants, moving faster at higher temperatures, cover more ground in the hot-wet season, suggesting that they can successfully travel to and occupy areas farther from water sources than currently thought. This has implications for management policies seeking to control elephant space use by altering the distribution of water sources.
